readme.md, before:

Qcumber
=======

Qcumber is a course catalog created for Queen's University. It lives at [Qcumber.ca](Qcumber.ca). Check out the [wiki](https://github.com/ChrisCooper/QcumberD/wiki) for extra information not in this readme.

The original source code is available under the terms of the Mozilla Public License, v. 2.0, available at http://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/. Images and other non-code assets are &copy; 2013 Chris Cooper.


Setup Guide
===========

* This guide has been verified for Ubuntu 11.10 and 12.10.
* Setting up on mac OSX should be quite similar. It will be verified soon.
* <del>Microsoft Windows offers great pains.</del>It works on Windows, but installation there is left as an exercise for the reader.


1. Installing the Prerequisites
-------------------------------

* Make sure you have all the needed permissions to install.
* For most users, this means prepending each install command with `sudo`
* Ex: `sudo apt-get install ...`

### Python and Libraries ###

This project has been tested with Python version 2.7. You can try other 2.x versions, but no promises.

* Run `apt-get install python2.7 python2.7-dev`
* This installs Python 2.7 as well as the headers needed for compiling python modules.
* Some modules that will be installed need to be compiled with GCC.
* Install GCC by running `apt-get install gcc`
* Install extra libraries needed for compiling modules: `apt-get install libxml2-dev libslt1-dev`

I (Phil) could not get Qcumber to run under Python 3 after spending a whole couple seconds of trying. I have not tested on any version of Python other than 2.7.

The [django project installation documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/intro/install/) would be a good starting point for other operating systems.


### Git and a Github account ###

* Go to [https://github.com/](https://github.com/) and follow the instructions to register an account.
* Run `apt-get install git` to install Git.
* Follow the guide at [https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git](https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git) to set up Git.


### Pip and a Virtual Environment ###

Pip is used to install extra Python modules that aren't included by default.
A virtual environment is an isolated Python environment. It allows for per-program environment configuration.

* Install Pip by running `apt-get install python-pip`
* Once Pip is installed, run `pip install virtualenv`
* The virtual environment will be configured later.

### LESS Compiler ###

LESS is an extension of CSS that adds support for dynamic behaviours like variables and functions.

* Install Node.js (including the Node Package Manager, `npm`) [using a package manager](https://github.com/joyent/node/wiki/Installing-Node.js-via-package-manager) or from [http://nodejs.org/](http://nodejs.org/)
* Install the LESS compiler via the Node Package Manger: `npm install -g less`
* You can now compile LESS files like this: `lessc styles.less > styles.css` (this is automatically done in this project).


2. Fork the Repository
----------------------

* Click the "Fork" button at the top-right of [https://github.com/ChrisCooper/QcumberD](https://github.com/ChrisCooper/QcumberD)
* You now have your own copy of QcumberD that you can safely mess around with!


3. Clone it to your computer
----------------------------

* Copy the `git@github.com:[yourusername]/QcumberD.git` link on the page.
* Open up a terminal window.
* Navigate to the folder in which you want to store your local copy of Qcumber. For me that would mean `cd ~/Code`
* Clone the repository. `git clone [repository]`, where `[repository]` is the `git@github...` url you copied earlier. 
* You should now have a `QcumberD` folder.


4. Create and Activate a Virtual Environment
--------------------------------------------

* Navigate into the `QcumberD` folder: `cd QcumberD`.
* Create a new virtual environment: `virtualenv --distribute venv`
* Activate the new environment: `source venv/bin/activate`

* NOTE: you will need to activate the virtual environment every time you want to run the local project. You can use the same preceeding `source` command.

* To deactivate the virtual environment: `deactivate`


5. Install Required Packages
----------------------------

Make sure you have activated your virtual environment (see above) before running this command!

* `pip install -r requirements.txt`
* If this command reports an error, check the log to see if you have all the dependencies required.


6. Configure Your Setup
-----------------------

* Clone the sample config file `cp qcumber/config/example_private_config.py qcumber/config/private_config.py`
* Change the configuration options in qcumber/config/private_config.py to suit your environment. If you are not performing caching, scraping, or sending emails, nothing needs to change in this file for development.


7. Initialize the Database
--------------------------

Make sure your virtualenv is activated!

* `python manage.py syncdb`
* Create the administrative account and follow the prompts.
* Migrate the `south` databases: `python manage.py migrate`.

8. Run Time!
------------

* `python manage.py runserver`
* Open a browser and go to [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)
* If everything works, you'll see the Qcumber home page!
* The database will be empty, so no courses will be present on your setup.

Extra Notes
===========

How to Scrape Course Data
-------------------------

* Go to [http://localhost:8000/scraper/](http://localhost:8000/scraper/)
* Click the name of one of the jobs. The page status will show as "Waiting for localhost..." while the scraper works.
* As it scrapes, the progress of the scraper will be visible in your terminal and the retrieved data will become available to the application.
* You can watch the subjects being added at [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)!
 Scraping time will vary based on the configuration, but a full shallow scrape takes anywhere from 5 to 7 hours, so be patient!

You can also create your own configurations for debugging, by visiting the admin page and creating a `Job Config`, under `scraper`. Job configs have the following options:
  * Deep: If this is set, the scraper will do a deep scrape (takes longer, but collects enrollment information)
  * Letters: The subject letters to scrape
  * Start/end indecies: Controls which subjects/courses to scrape. Implemented with Python list slices.

Commit message:

Added link to main repo

readme.md, after:

Qcumber
=======

Qcumber is a course catalog created for Queen's University. It is live at [Qcumber.ca](Qcumber.ca), and the main repository is at [ChrisCooper/QcumberD](https://github.com/ChrisCooper/QcumberD) on Github. Check out the [wiki](https://github.com/ChrisCooper/QcumberD/wiki) for extra information not in this readme.

The original source code is available under the terms of the Mozilla Public License, v. 2.0, available at http://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/. Images and other non-code assets are &copy; 2013 Chris Cooper.


Setup Guide
===========

* This guide has been verified for Ubuntu 11.10 and 12.10.
* Setting up on mac OSX should be quite similar. It will be verified soon.
* <del>Microsoft Windows offers great pains.</del>It works on Windows, but installation there is left as an exercise for the reader.


1. Installing the Prerequisites
-------------------------------

* Make sure you have all the needed permissions to install.
* For most users, this means prepending each install command with `sudo`
* Ex: `sudo apt-get install ...`

### Python and Libraries ###

This project has been tested with Python version 2.7. You can try other 2.x versions, but no promises.

* Run `apt-get install python2.7 python2.7-dev`
* This installs Python 2.7 as well as the headers needed for compiling python modules.
* Some modules that will be installed need to be compiled with GCC.
* Install GCC by running `apt-get install gcc`
* Install extra libraries needed for compiling modules: `apt-get install libxml2-dev libslt1-dev`

I (Phil) could not get Qcumber to run under Python 3 after spending a whole couple seconds of trying. I have not tested on any version of Python other than 2.7.

The [django project installation documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.4/intro/install/) would be a good starting point for other operating systems.


### Git and a Github account ###

* Go to [https://github.com/](https://github.com/) and follow the instructions to register an account.
* Run `apt-get install git` to install Git.
* Follow the guide at [https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git](https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git) to set up Git.


### Pip and a Virtual Environment ###

Pip is used to install extra Python modules that aren't included by default.
A virtual environment is an isolated Python environment. It allows for per-program environment configuration.

* Install Pip by running `apt-get install python-pip`
* Once Pip is installed, run `pip install virtualenv`
* The virtual environment will be configured later.

### LESS Compiler ###

LESS is an extension of CSS that adds support for dynamic behaviours like variables and functions.

* Install Node.js (including the Node Package Manager, `npm`) [using a package manager](https://github.com/joyent/node/wiki/Installing-Node.js-via-package-manager) or from [http://nodejs.org/](http://nodejs.org/)
* Install the LESS compiler via the Node Package Manger: `npm install -g less`
* You can now compile LESS files like this: `lessc styles.less > styles.css` (this is automatically done in this project).


2. Fork the Repository
----------------------

* Click the "Fork" button at the top-right of [https://github.com/ChrisCooper/QcumberD](https://github.com/ChrisCooper/QcumberD)
* You now have your own copy of QcumberD that you can safely mess around with!


3. Clone it to your computer
----------------------------

* Copy the `git@github.com:[yourusername]/QcumberD.git` link on the page.
* Open up a terminal window.
* Navigate to the folder in which you want to store your local copy of Qcumber. For me that would mean `cd ~/Code`
* Clone the repository. `git clone [repository]`, where `[repository]` is the `git@github...` url you copied earlier. 
* You should now have a `QcumberD` folder.


4. Create and Activate a Virtual Environment
--------------------------------------------

* Navigate into the `QcumberD` folder: `cd QcumberD`.
* Create a new virtual environment: `virtualenv --distribute venv`
* Activate the new environment: `source venv/bin/activate`

* NOTE: you will need to activate the virtual environment every time you want to run the local project. You can use the same preceeding `source` command.

* To deactivate the virtual environment: `deactivate`


5. Install Required Packages
----------------------------

Make sure you have activated your virtual environment (see above) before running this command!

* `pip install -r requirements.txt`
* If this command reports an error, check the log to see if you have all the dependencies required.


6. Configure Your Setup
-----------------------

* Clone the sample config file `cp qcumber/config/example_private_config.py qcumber/config/private_config.py`
* Change the configuration options in qcumber/config/private_config.py to suit your environment. If you are not performing caching, scraping, or sending emails, nothing needs to change in this file for development.


7. Initialize the Database
--------------------------

Make sure your virtualenv is activated!

* `python manage.py syncdb`
* Create the administrative account and follow the prompts.
* Migrate the `south` databases: `python manage.py migrate`.

8. Run Time!
------------

* `python manage.py runserver`
* Open a browser and go to [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)
* If everything works, you'll see the Qcumber home page!
* The database will be empty, so no courses will be present on your setup.

Extra Notes
===========

How to Scrape Course Data
-------------------------

* Go to [http://localhost:8000/scraper/](http://localhost:8000/scraper/)
* Click the name of one of the jobs. The page status will show as "Waiting for localhost..." while the scraper works.
* As it scrapes, the progress of the scraper will be visible in your terminal and the retrieved data will become available to the application.
* You can watch the subjects being added at [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000)!
 Scraping time will vary based on the configuration, but a full shallow scrape takes anywhere from 5 to 7 hours, so be patient!

You can also create your own configurations for debugging, by visiting the admin page and creating a `Job Config`, under `scraper`. Job configs have the following options:
  * Deep: If this is set, the scraper will do a deep scrape (takes longer, but collects enrollment information)
  * Letters: The subject letters to scrape
  * Start/end indecies: Controls which subjects/courses to scrape. Implemented with Python list slices.
